so taking an english language test can
be a pretty
nerve-wracking experience right and
sometimes if you become
too nervous it can sort of cloud your
thinking
if you suffer from this then you should
listen to this podcast that i did with a
guy called harley devos
who's a performance psychologist we
talked about different strategies on how
to
tackle anxiety and test performance so
check it out
hello everybody my name is jay i'm one
of the expert teachers here at e2
language
and today i'm chatting to a sports
psychologist named harley devos how's it
going harley
i'm very well thanks jane how are you
yeah some of you might be thinking
why would i want to be talking to a
sports psychologist when we prepare
people for english language exams and
the reason is
i think there's great overlap between
what athletes do
and what test candidates do obviously
test candidates do it
i luckily only just do it sort of once
or twice
but there's certainly some overlap there
uh harley can you just
uh introduce yourself if you don't mind
yep certainly
um firstly um just a minor correction
i'm a performance psychologist not a
sport
right um i'm actually doing the
registrar program to become an endorsed
um sport psychologist um so i've got a
master's degree in sport and exercise
psychology but
i guess just in the interest of using
i proper titles a performance
psychologist but at the moment
or a sport and exercise psychology
registrar um but not a sports
psychologist so
that's my background so currently i work
for a company called condor performance
and we
provide sport and performance psychology
services
to athletes and performers we work with
individual athletes we work with coaches
we work with teams
and this work um is both with
athletes and performers based in
australia but also globally as well
um one of the i guess advantages of
of being in 2020 and especially it's
been probably amplified on the back of
covert 19 is that you know with
all the technology that's available now
uh you don't have to be
physically in the same place as someone
anymore to be able to access those
services
so yep a lot of work with that work with
a whole host
of athletes and performers from from
different sports
and i'm also i've just started a phd
which is in sports psychology which i'm
doing through the university of
newcastle and that's in partnership with
the australian institute of sport
nice and what's your focus in your phd
uh it's looking at
athlete performance health we're calling
it
um and sort of there'll be a focus on
mental health and on sleep and i suppose
developing
strategies to optimize those with a view
to
improving athletes recovery and also
helping
from a psychological point of view to
reduce time
away from training that athletes spend
because of injury and illness
so you know one of the big things that
we we know is there's a really strong
link between
physically our health and mentally
our health and that sort of mind-body
connection and
so you're looking at from a
psychological point of view how we can
improve athletes health so that they can
train
more frequently and i guess the more
time that athletes are able to train
and the less time that they spend absent
from training through injury and illness
um the greater that they're likely to be
able to produce
their uh best performances when it
really mounts
and um yeah so it's sort of in that
space that we're
that we're looking yeah nice nice nice
yeah the physical
and the mental they're obviously so
tightly
interlinked aren't they yes all right so
the way that i thought we might
um structure this talk is to talk about
what our candidates should be doing
pre-exam
in the months or days or
leading up to their test i then want to
talk about what they should be doing on
the day of their exam
and you mentioned sleep there which is
which will be a part of that
uh obviously the night before hopefully
not during the exam
and then uh i want to also talk about
their performance and their what's going
on during the exam itself and i should
just
also mention here that i've taken these
tests myself myself
these tests are very high stakes that's
why i wanted to
talk to someone about performance
and they can be very anxiety provoking
and one of the things that happens when
you get very anxious before an exam or
during an exam
is that it inhibits your cognition
obviously this is different than
sport because you're i suspect you're
focusing more on
how it affects your physical performance
uh correct me if i'm wrong
here we're really thinking about you're
not so worried about your physical
performance in an exam obviously but
certainly worried about how
you know you're you're reading that text
and are you able to concentrate on that
text are you able to
uh comprehend that text or or speak i
guess there is a physical aspect to
speaking
stuff like that i think i mean i think
one of the things about performance
um is that it's so intertwined between
the physical
and the psychological and i guess
in some sports um
you know there's certainly an external
element where it's perceived to be
a very physical sport and
you know in in a hundred meters sprint
the person who
can run the fastest is going to win
of course what actually allows that
person to
run the fastest is often based on
psychological underpinnings you know
those that can deal with pressure the
best
in the moment of the olympic final for
example so
yeah because it's you know the person
who
makes the least mistakes or that can be
the most
focused is who's going to that sense so
certainly from that
um and i guess you know if we're talking
about it from a pure exam point of view
there's a much higher
cognitive and intellectual component
there but there's still
a lot of the principles of the same
there's still the capacity to talk
uh if it's writing you've still gotta
still gotta write and deal with that and
we know that
you know anxiety in a performance
setting can certainly
uh significantly impact um
you know even both most basic motor
skills
um you know such as such as talking and
i'm sure
you know a lot of us will have
experienced at some point doing a
but it's a presentation in in a
classroom or delivering a speech in a
public space
where you get so anxious that it's
actually really hard to get the words
out
absolutely it's definitely that physical
component there as well oh it's
fascinating isn't it really really
interesting stuff
yeah and and the other thing is i think
people underestimate how much this can
impact test performance you know
even native english speakers who go and
take these tests can can experience this
as well and all of a sudden
their language skills which are native
natural are inhibited
and and also language is just one of
those weird things where
some days you wake up and you speak like
a poet other days you wake up and you
struggle to get a sentence out too so
there's a lot of variability just
in in day-to-day life with your language
abilities as well
all right let's start with pre-exam what
what do you think our exam candidates
should be doing sort of leading up to
their tests let's say a week out from
their test
a week out so i think the the key thing
to
to performing well uh in most situations
is you want to get
your work done early so you know the
classic saying
um proper preparation prevents poor
performance
so really i suppose focusing on that
having
really strong study habits is really
important so that's where you know a
good routine
can be recognizing within yourself
when you study the best so some of us
you know what if we wake up in the early
in the morning and the first thing that
we do
is sort of hit the books for a couple of
hours because that's when we're at our
um
our best mentally we might be at a
sharpest and things like that
others okay i might need to sort of eat
my way into the day before i do it but
certainly
uh you know developing really strong
study habits
is a really important first step i think
that needs to be built up
uh obviously the more that you know
the more confidence that you can take
that you can perform
at your best so that's the important
thing and
you know i think there's a an element
there uh
which you know if you look at it from a
performance side
when we watch athletes and we watch top
performers
um do their thing you know for the for
the average person this kind of that
or like wow they're so amazing but what
you overlook is the fact that they
have put in so much hard work to get to
that point yeah and
that's the that's the key thing about
performance is you've got to work really
hard
so you know when it comes to preparing
for an exam
you've got to put in the work you're not
going to so
i think that's a really important uh
first step that you've got to actually
do the work good carl
yeah that's music to my ears we're all
about preparation at e2 language so
that's
that's great yeah really is have to
start building up your endurance
as well uh one of the things with these
exams is they go for about three hours
and you know if you if you're studying
bits and pieces here and there for 10
minutes or 20 minutes
it's a whole different ball game when
you're into the you know the the last
bit of the exam you know the
end of the second hour of the exam and
it's in the listening section
and you're you're you it really is a
test of endurance
so that preparation for endurance is
really important too
um what would you say about preparing um
it's it's a good idea to prepare when
you're feeling good and when you've had
a nice you know cup of tea and you relax
and you sit down at the computer and you
you know burning incense or whatever
you're doing to make yourself feel good
but
on on the exam day you you may not be
feeling good so
would you recommend that people prepare
when they're tired or
hungry or in other states abs
absolutely like that's really music to
my ears um
definitely you want to spend some of the
time
doing your preparation um preparing when
yeah when things are really difficult
for you when you're not at best when you
just say when you are tired or when
you're when you're hungry or whatever it
is
because absolutely right on exam day
we can't guarantee that you're going to
feel at your very best
and one of the important things in
performance is
you don't have to feel your best to
perform your best
so there's a there's a big difference
between those two so absolutely doing
practicing when you're not
feeling well is really really important
so
definitely we want to be doing that um
at least some of the time you know some
of the ways that i guess can help that
for some people that might be studying
in the evening at the end of the day
when they're
really tired or you know putting in
a solid block of study before dinner
when they're when they're hungry and
just being able to deal with
yeah with that um doing some study when
you don't
want to do it you know when you're
protesting and it's telling you to go
and do other things but actually just
sort of sitting down
and doing that is is really important so
that you
you know develop uh experience
at being able to produce
the work when you don't feel like it
great yeah i mean i remember taking the
ielts test
and you have to i had to get up at about
7 a.m to get to the testing center and
then had to wait in line for
hours i can't remember what i ate for
breakfast but you know then
the first cab off the rank is the
writing test we have to write
you know a 250 word essay um
and other bits and pieces and that's
that's at nine o'clock in the morning
and um
i i really thought to myself wow you
know how many people wake up and write
essays that doesn't happen so that would
be a really good
practice to wake up and get in that
mindset yeah i think there's a lot to be
said
for being able to to try and
replicate exam like conditions as part
of your study so
that's the thing so doing some work at
the time so yeah if you've got an early
morning exam
or practice getting up getting out of
bed getting ready
and doing study at that time so that
that becomes
a little bit of a of a routine for you i
think that's that's really important
yeah all right yep absolutely what about
you know most people are okay they get a
few jitters and they're um
you know that they manage through
whatever it's not such a big deal but we
do have some people who write in and
they
genuinely suffer anxiety issues
um what about what sort of practices do
you recommend
practices like mindfulness meditation or
physical exercise how can these people
leading up to their exams sort of calm
their nerves
yes look certainly you know for anyone
that is
struggling with an underlying mental
health issue it's important to know that
there is
help available and there's really good
help and support out there so certainly
for anyone who's in that
uh category i strongly encourage you to
go and speak to someone
um it may be someone like like myself
who
you know has an interest in performance
but also has a strong interest in mental
health or it might be someone who
specializes in
an anxiety disorder or something else
but that's really important
that we want to sort of work on that but
if we're talking about general
uh i guess performance anxiety and how
to manage those nerves
um certainly the the mindfulness and
meditations and and guided
exercises and relaxation can be really
helpful
what i would caution against though is
if people
aren't already familiar with that it's
probably not a good idea
doing it so we don't really want to be
introducing anything new
right before a major performance because
that can actually
be detrimental to performance so
for those that have experience in that
absolutely that's a really good practice
to maintain but if you haven't and it's
only a few days before the exam
don't start now don't go into meditation
retreat i wouldn't i wouldn't be doing
that
what i think can help you know certainly
um
movement is is really important and so
yes
you know in the days leading up to the
exam part of that daily routine
should be some form of of moving your
body that's really important whether
that's
going for a walk or going to the gym or
you know
having to hit a tennis with a friend
doing a dance class will
if you can do them at the moment but
whatever it is that it is so moving your
body is really important we know that
really great way for us to
reduce stress when we when we move
it helps our body to metabolize cortisol
which is our stress hormone
so that's really important and then also
we know that
movement is really important for
cognition
okay it helps with learning and with
memory
so definitely doing something every day
is going to be
really important you know in terms of
i guess closer to the exam or on the day
of the exam
um what can be really helpful is
deep breathing and knowing how to deep
breathe
[Music]
you know deep breathing is really
effective physiologically
at actually changing uh our brain
chemistry um so one of the things that
we we know
is when we are in a stressful situation
such as an exam
our threat system is activated
our part of our brain gets activated and
that's when we start to see
our heart rate increase our breathing
gets shallower and faster
our digestive system shuts down which is
why we can experience the the
butterflies in the tummy
i'm sweaty we might become jittery um so
they're all the physical
signs we experience plus there's also
the cognitive album with the sort of the
worrying and the catastrophizing
the thinking so breathing is really good
because it actually helps us
to switch um which parts of our brain
are activated a little bit like
when we're anxious it's like our foot's
on the accelerator
but to perform really well in an exam we
need the brakes on so we need to slow it
down so breathing is really good for
that
a little useful exercise that can help
is what we call
box breathing and this is simply just to
breathe in
through your nose for four seconds hold
that breath for four seconds
breathe out for four seconds hold that
for four seconds and repeat that and
it's just like you're going around a box
for those who are very visual they might
want to imagine that box just in front
of them and that can just be a nice
way just to help slow down the breathing
which is really
important so that's that's one aspect
the other thing which i think is also
important to acknowledge
is that exams are difficult
and they are stress provoking situations
and they're designed in many ways
intentionally to do that
and so part of it is also i guess
a willingness to tolerate discomfort
knowing that this exam is going to be
difficult but it's really important for
me
to do that because it's going to help me
with
future studies or with you know other
aspects of my life
so it's really important that i do this
exam and i'm willing
to sit with the discomfort that i might
experience along the way
in order of working towards what's
important for me
well said yeah i'm a big fan of
acceptance just saying you know what
my my heart's going to flutter my
stomach will feel terrible my hands will
sweat
who cares i'll get over it that's that's
okay that's normal
oh it's just my body responding to a
threat it's okay i'm here to do a job
yeah and i'm gonna do that yeah good one
well said
all right so what about sort of night
before the exam with diet
and sleep what what do you have to say
about that yeah so
again we don't want to change anything a
day or two days before so
we want to keep doing our same routine
so hopefully
you know everyone has a good sleep
routine where they go to bed at the same
time
every night and they wake at the same
time and if they're not
it's probably a good idea to be doing
that and particularly you know a few
days before the exam
so if you've got a 9 a.m exam and you
know you have to be up
at 6 30 in the morning so that you can
have something to eat and you can get to
the exam
then practice getting up at 6 30 you
know a week before the longer the better
so that you're just
consistently waking at that time and
weekends and and with that then you also
want to try and set
a bedtime that's the same so it might be
you know 10 10 p.m or whatever
that's the time that i'm that i'm going
to bed i'm going to sort of build that
into my routine so
we want to keep that the same i have
heard
anecdotally from some athletes that for
them they find
the sleep two nights before their
competition
is the one that they most want to get
right
because of the night before things can
happen or whatever
and we again we can perform in the short
term
even if we haven't slept well yep so if
they can nail it two nights before
then at least they've had a really good
sleep and a good rest and
they know that they'll be right to go so
making that sleep a priority is really
important but certainly
the night before i think what is really
important is you want to do
your last revision of notes um
you don't want to be studying any new
material that close because that's going
to
impact performance so hopefully it's
just a revision of notes
and you want to give yourself a really
good break so it's about okay
i agree i've reviewed my notes i've done
what i can
i'm ready to go that i remember in high
school
basically having that attitude it's like
there's nothing more i can do now
so i may as well just chill out watch a
movie relax
that's exactly right so that's really
important so i encourage people to do
that to be
switching off um and really trying to
relax and unwind the night before
uh making sure that there's you know a
period of time probably
at least 30 minutes ideally 60 before
bed
where you're not on any devices
just to help sleep make sure that your
room is a good space
for sleep is is really important as well
that it's cool it's dark it's quiet
yeah it's you know as free from clutter
as much as possible
you know we're not studying in bed or
anything like that because that's going
to impact
it so certainly that unwinding process
is really important i think that's a big
thing
and the other thing that's also
important in this is if
you are really anxious enough for an
exam and you can't sleep
don't spend long periods of time
laying in bed not sleeping
because what we do is we actually
condition our mind
that that's what we do we go to bed and
we just lay there and we think
so give yourself 20 minutes half an hour
max
if you're not asleep come up get out of
bed go into a different room
do something that's really quiet and not
stimulating maybe it's
reading or some coloring or some
journaling
or listen to some really sort of soft
calming music and there's some really
great
soundtracks that you can get you know
sounds of rain on the roof and
things like that be really good um
again be aware of caffeine and how much
caffeine you have
too close to bed you know for those that
do enjoy a cup of tea or coffee um
caffeine before you perform can can
increase alertness and can help there's
a
there is a an effect there so certainly
you know if you're someone who likes a
coffee in the morning like i am
we'll have your coffee in the morning
before the exam that's that's important
to do
um but don't have you know the coffee
probably at dinner time because you
might not be able to so
yeah and and probably don't introduce
any any new foods into your diet the
night before or just a you know certain
foods
i would i would avoid like chili you
know you know obvious things like that
that's that's right if if anyone has any
um
sensitivities or intolerances to certain
foods be steering clear of them
you know the night before so yes eating
just a normal
healthy meal is really good
so i encourage you to do that don't eat
too close to
to going to bed yeah give your body a
chance to actually
start digesting and processing that food
before you go to bed
so that's really what so you want to eat
something that's that's wholesome
um you know it has good proteins
plenty of plenty of vegetables there
some good fats and carbohydrates in that
so just just eating what you would would
normally
nice good one all right let's imagine
it's on the day the alarm goes off
um what what what do you recommend first
thing up
oh look i think i mean everyone has
different some people have
very deliberate and structured morning
routines
some don't but certainly um you know
it's important
between waking and getting ready for the
exam that you've had a really good
filling breakfast so that you know
hopefully you're not going to go into
the exam
hungry also that your blood sugars are
stable we don't really want them
crashing
it exam because we know so nothing you
know too too sugary
uh so you know it might be a smoothie
with some some fruit and
greek yogurt or you know in the winter
months good porridge or oatmeal
something like that that's going to sort
of give you sustained energy beforehand
is really important yeah it's not going
to be too sensitive in the in the tummy
and cause you any issues there
so having breakfast if you do like you
know a cup of tea or coffee
in the morning have that and give
yourself time to have that
um good idea to drink plenty of water as
well you want to sort of be
hydrated as you go into the exam as well
because we know dehydration
yeah ability to to think yeah
good one good all right yep so don't
change it up too much
that that makes sense big breakfast i'm
a big fan of i like healthy fats you
know avocados stuff like that that seems
to sustain my energy for a long time
cut one toast made with it with an egg
or without an egg yeah
ideal um this one is is more my own
personal experience
more so than anything i know from
science but for me when i was always
doing exams at uni
i always had this motto that if i looked
good
then i would feel good and if i felt
good then i could perform
better yeah so for me making sure that
you know i had a shower
had a shave and put put on jeans and i
like it
i wasn't i wasn't looking up in my
trackies
and that was something that was
important for me yeah and for others
that might be important as well no i
like it i think i think you're
taking a bit of pride in how you look
you don't have to wear a dinner suit
to the exam but just you know something
you're you're smart and casual you're
going to be
probably think about um different layers
in case it's really cold
in the exam room or in a hall wherever
it's done
or if it's hot so that's really
important as well that you sort of dress
depending on the conditions yeah because
you're hot or too cold
that might impact your ability to
perform well
for sure yeah i think also you know you
want to make sure you've got your
transport organized the testing center
might be far away
make sure you've got your uber booked or
you know which train station you're
getting off at even doing that if you
know the week before just so you you
know what that routine is you don't want
any surprises
on the day of the exam you certainly
don't want to rock up late or
as i did once rock up and realized that
i hadn't actually
booked the test itself so
yes you want to make sure you've you've
done all that sort of stuff right
so you've got that um you give yourself
plenty of time i think is really
important so in the event that
you know the trains aren't running for
example if you're taking public
transport
you've got to get an uber and still get
there
you're better off being at the exam
center early and having to sit around
rather than rushing in late so we want
to just try and eliminate
as much stress as possible and again
doing all that stuff doing it early
having your
your research done early knowing where
you have to go how you're going to get
there how long it's going to take
that's really important yeah one of the
things you have to do when you take one
of these tests
is sit in the waiting room and i see
people with sort of notes they're doing
their last minute cramming but
one thing i like to do is actually take
a pen and a piece of paper and just
start writing
i find when i when i just start writing
off the bat with no how can i say after
a few sentences or a few paragraphs i
start to get in the rhythm my brain
starts to get in the in the writing
rhythm
so obviously it's a bit like warming up
before the exam i think that's really
helpful
just to practice writing an essay in the
waiting room just casually
not putting pressure on yourself but
just getting those those bloods flowing
yeah that's that's a great idea and i
think particularly when it's
the focus is on actually the writing
yeah right
content is really important as well yeah
um
personally i'd probably be discouraging
people from sort of reading notes
like if you're in the waiting room
waiting to agree not you're not going to
gain anything at all
it's too late don't know what time you
get into the waiting room not ready to
do it
and that's not gonna that's not gonna
help and if anything's gonna
actually hinder your performance so
you've gotta get all your study done
before that's right some of these tests
are also paper-based tests and you have
to write your essay with a pencil
that was a real shock to me the first
time i had to do that i hadn't written
with a gray lead pencil
since i was in grade six at school um
and i actually didn't really i mean i
had the strength but i tell you what my
hand was getting pretty sore my
handwriting was getting pretty messy by
the end of it and i think a good
practice would have been to actually
write a couple of essays
or do my preparation with a gray lead
pencil
that would have been helpful look that's
that's a really great point and
definitely certainly if if you can
know as much about the exam before
you're going to do it so that you can
prepare accordingly so yeah if it's
going to be done
either with a gray led pencil we'll
practice writing with a gray lead pencil
i think you can buy those little grips
that you can put on them so possibly if
you're allowed to bring something like
that in
put in your pocket then if you do have
to wrap the pencil at least that might
help
yeah just keep hands from from you know
cramping and tightening up so to speak
so little things like that's really
important but definitely you want to be
practicing
what you're going to have to do in the
exam you know in the days before
you go into the exam good one all right
let's imagine you're in the exam room
and you can
open your test booklets and begin
writing or begin reading or whatever it
is you're doing
let's say somebody's at this stage let's
say it's the reading section
and this is where emotion can really
affect cognition when it comes to
reading i've experienced this
i'll give you a funny little example i
was teaching the other day
i teach online these live classes and i
think there was about 250 people
watching me as i was explaining this the
answer to this multiple choice question
um and i totally forgot what the answer
was and i had to work it out in front of
250 people as they watched me
and all of a sudden my mind just shut
down i couldn't read that paragraph
properly it's like oh whoa
whoa i had to just say to the students
oh listen i'll just come back to this in
a minute you know bought myself some
time but that can certainly happen what
would you recommend to people
when they're you know they're looking at
the paragraph and it's just not making
sense to them because of
there's too much emotion too much
anxiety going through their mind i
i certainly think when you sort of go in
and sit down
um that's a really good opportunity to
have a couple of those deep breaths we
talked before about the box breathing so
that's a really good thing just to sort
of try and really calm and
and center yourself in in that moment i
think that's really important
yeah then when you start reading again
maybe having a breath before you
actually
start yeah and if you find that you
you're reading something and it's not
making sense or you can't read it
just stop take a moment and then
come back to it or move on to a
different section and
you know i think that's really important
so you don't want to spend too long on
something that you're not
being able to comprehend and not
understand yeah that's only going to
further increase any anxiety you might
be feeling so
taking that time possibly something you
could do before the exam
and you can certainly do once you're in
the exam
is you know we talked earlier about
movement and how important that is
or we can still move you know even if
we're seated we can still stretch
and things like that and just taking a
little bit of time either in reading
time or throughout the exam
just to do that is really important as
well so
you know if you started reading a
section in reading time and you find it
really hard to comprehend although just
put it down for a moment have a quick
stretch move the arms
around just sort of shake your legs out
have a slow controlled calming breath
and then try again i agree man i think
you know
those those breaths that you take where
you become really you know conscious and
aware that can really just stop that
sort of compounding mechanism of the
mind when it starts to spin out of
control definitely
even you know some people sometimes just
you know shutting your eyes
for a moment and then reopening them and
just allowing yourself to refocus can
also help yeah
yeah good stuff good um
all right what about just maintaining
attention
maintaining concentration throughout
this throughout this exam
um i i i think obviously we've had a
good breakfast that's going to help a
lot
what else is there that we can do to to
keep the focus
so i think what's important to realize
if if you've got the exam and it's going
to go for three hours
you're not going to be able to sustain
your attention
for that whole time you know we just
know that
humans don't concentrate for that for
that length of time
so what helps i think is to just break
it down
into like smaller chunks so you might do
it per question or per section
and so you might work on um
focusing on you know you've got you've
got to write a short essay so it's okay
i'm going to focus on that
i'm going to write that and then i'm
just going to give myself a minute after
that
just stop to breathe just to move a
little bit
and then i'm going to go on to the next
section and so we actually break it down
into chunks and i think that's a really
helpful thing to do
i know again another personal thing that
i used to do and depending on
the exam conditions where this is
allowed but i in exams would always take
what i would call a tactical
toilet break so in the middle of the
exam whether or not i needed to go to
the bathroom
i would just go and i'll just give
myself two three minutes
out of the exam room maybe splash a
little bit of cold water on the face
just reset refocus an opportunity to get
the blood flowing because you're moving
around
and then coming back in and going again
and for me i always found that
the time that i would lose by doing that
i would gain
because i was able to sustain my
attention for longer so
something like that i think is really
important so don't i suppose
my advice would be don't think that you
have to sit in your seat for the whole
three hours and do the exam from start
to finish that we can break it up
we can break it down and if you do need
to get out and come back in that can
actually be really
really valuable so that would be
something i would consider
um but again using our you know using
our breathing
is also really important during during
that exam as well
um just being able to take those those
calming centering breaths just to reset
and
yeah i think breaking it down into
smaller sections
one helps to reduce the complexity of
the task which makes it
a little bit easier for us to do
you know jf if you and i we're going to
go and climb
mount kilimanjaro for example and we
stand at the bottom we look at the top
and we think wow that's really high
that's really long i don't think we can
do it
you're forgetting the fact that you have
to take individual steps
to get to that point and if we start
focusing on those individual steps
eventually we get to the top good one
then we can apply that similar principle
when it comes to an exam that sometimes
we
we lose sight of what we actually have
to do because we get overwhelmed by the
complexity
of the task but if we actually think
okay i've got this section to do
then i've got this section and then i've
got that section well i'll just break
them down
and i can do that i can do one section
and then i can do the next section
great well said you know the uh the
the biggest uh way that candidates will
screw up their test in the writing
section
is not their grammar it's not their
vocabulary range it's actually writing
off topic
because what candidates typically do or
what they can do is
you know they're in such a rush you know
it's like go bang
and then they'll they'll quickly read
the question prompts not read it
properly they'll scribble out an essay
without sort of
as you mentioned which i think is a
great point you know stopping after the
first paragraph
the introduction going okay does that
make sense how i'm going to link the
second paragraph
writing that one looking at the question
prompt again you know just
doing it stage by stage well said
and i think even on that um you know
from
from when i was at school when i had to
to write essays in exams
um you know some advice i received was
always
spend a couple of minutes actually
making a little plan
for what you want to say and how you're
going to say it
i think again that time that if you can
spend a moment or two just jotting down
some ideas
about what's really important that will
save you time and that helps to ensure
that you're actually what you're writing
is
on topic because there'd be nothing
worse than
writing a really great essay but it's
not relevant to the question that's been
asked
that's it that's it okay cool the other
one
and i guess the last bit is um talking
about the speaking section
why this freaks candidates out is
because when they're dealing with the
listening
the reading and the writing they're
dealing with a piece of paper it's in
front of them right
but then all of a sudden they're they're
now dealing in the speaking section with
another human being with what's called
an interlocutor someone is going to
be uh asking them questions and
responding to them
this is an interesting one i guess it
differs between exams some
other exams like pt you're actually
speaking to a computer which
people find very helpful that can
actually uh you know
they prefer that to speaking to a person
my recommendation for this one is that
these ielts examiners for example
they've seen
all sorts of people come through and
they've seen people in all sorts of
states of mind right
and they're professionals if you're
shaking or quivering or whatever
that's not what they're worried about
that's not what they're paying attention
to they're paying
attention to your language
so if you do find yourself in a
situation where you know you're having
anxiety that's completely normal
as we said before i think just sort of
accepting it and going you know what my
hands are shaking
i can't maintain eye contact whatever's
going on it doesn't really matter
you know that's not what you're being
scored on there but um
do you have any last suggestions about
the speaking section when they're in
front of a person
what would you recommend there yeah look
i think that that big part about
accepting is is really important
recognizing it will be a challenge
um again trying to do as much
practice as you can beforehand to
prepare for that
so walking with different people
practicing getting used to that
um trying to make that i guess as
pressurized as you can so you know doing
it when you're tired doing it when
you're hungry
um doing it with someone you don't know
getting to
make up material that you're not aware
of yeah whatever all that sort of stuff
so that you get used to doing that
i think probably when you're actually in
the moment
what i would say is it's okay
to have a breath and a pause the force
bonding
so you know what i would imagine would
probably happen a lot of time
is someone starts talking to you
and your mind starts to think okay what
do i need to say what do i need to say
and then you start talking and maybe
it's not coming out
as you'd like or you've lost track of
words and it's like a bit of a snowball
it just
spirals and it just gets worse and worse
dealing with so actually take a time to
to pause and process what you've been
said what's been said to you sorry
before
the you then respond because that would
be probably my advice again just trying
to sort of really
slow things down even if you're just
buying yourself
half a second or a second that can be
enough time for your brain to actually
compute what
it is that you need to say so i guess
get your brain to work before your mouth
is probably going to be really helpful
in that setting i would imagine
it's good to really pay attention to
the other person because your body is
going to be going through all sorts of
physiological
whatever is going on swirls and whirls
and twists and turns and stuff like that
but if you're paying attention to the
person asking you the question really
you know putting your concentration on
understanding what they're saying
your body can do its thing that's fine
but and you'll uh respond
appropriately which is absolutely right
and there's something to be said where
if you can
make your focus a little bit more
outward yes so
directed on the other person you know
what are they saying what's my job my
job
is to relay the information that i have
to them uh or to engage with them in a
conversation that's my job
and if we can just move that shift that
our focus then it helps take it off the
fact that you might
be really anxious and uncomfortable in
that moment
but you become less aware of it because
your
focus is now on them and what they're
saying which then actually helps you
to do what you need to do that's it
that's it yeah yeah
well said it's it's quite interesting
like i do a bit of meditation
and um one of the things that i've uh
become aware of is
how often my body can be in pain but i'm
just not aware of it and
because i'm not paying attention to it
it doesn't really matter there's all
sorts of pain shooting around my body
and my shoulders
in fact if i pay attention now it's like
actually my shoulders are quite sore but
up until that point it didn't matter
because i wasn't focusing on that i was
focusing on having a conversation and
whatever i was doing at work earlier
yeah cool
um great all right this has been a
really
really good talk i think this has been
full of helpful bits of information for
um for these people who who do have to
take this high stakes exam and it is
high stakes they've got you know
their visas or their university entrance
writing on it
and we're very uh empathetic
sympathetic to that any last
things you'd like to say yeah look
probably the the last thing
um i guess from my point of view is it's
really important to
believe in yourself good one so
you know you've earned the right to sit
these exams because of what you've done
beforehand and not everyone gets that
opportunity so
um the all blacks have a saying
uh that pressure is a privilege the idea
being that if you
find yourself in a situation where you
feel pressure
it's actually privileged because you've
earned the right to feel that pressure
and i think in many ways sitting exam
relates quite well to that that idea
that
i've earned the right to be here and so
yes it is going to be
stressful because it's a high stakes uh
situation yeah but the right to do that
so i think that's really important
um you know believing in yourself
trusting
your processes so you know trusting that
you've done the work
that will get you there is really
important and so that's where we talked
earlier about
you know having really good preparation
and good study habits
early totally it's important because
that's what gives us confidence
that that's i trust that i've done the
work that now i can deliver
when it counts so i think that's really
important and the final thing as well
is i think just really to to embrace the
challenge
and to try and enjoy that experience and
yes
difficult but if you can try and enjoy
it
and say it's an opportunity and i think
that's really important a lot of
difficult situations
we perceive as a threat
to whether or not you know we we get a
visa or we can get into a university
and that makes it really hard but if we
can start to see it as a challenge and
as an opportunity
that just shifts our mindset slightly
and allows us
to accept the difficulty that we'll face
to accept those nerves that are going to
be there and the self-doubt
but allow us to do what we need to do to
get the performance that we need yeah
great man cool got to kick the exam's
ass
that's what it's about that's exactly
right
good stuff harley thanks so much for for
chatting today was really interesting
no thanks thanks so much for the
opportunity joe i've really enjoyed it
and hopefully
for the listeners out there they can
pick something out of this and that will
help them
with their exams good stuff cool
hopefully you found that conversation
helpful i certainly thought it was very
interesting
now just keep in mind that a lot of
confidence comes
from good preparation so keep studying
on e2 language
[Music]
you